GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Guide to Local Production:
WHO-recommended Handrub Formulations

Introduction: This Guide to Local Production
of WHO-recommended Handrub Formulations
is separated into two discrete but interrelated
sections:

Part A provides a practical guide for use at the
pharmacy bench during the actual preparation
of the formulation. Users may want to display
the material on the wall of the production unit.
Part B summarizes some essential background
technical information and is taken from WHO
Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care (2009).
Within Part B the user has access to important
safety and cost information and supplementary
material relating to dispensers and distribution.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

PART A: GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION
Part A is intended to guide a local producer in the actual preparation
of the formulation.

Materials required (small volume production)
REAGENTS FOR
FORMULATION 1:

REAGENTS FOR
FORMULATION 2:

• Ethanol 96%

• Isopropyl alcohol 99.8%

• Hydrogen peroxide 3%

• Hydrogen peroxide 3%

• Glycerol 98%

• Glycerol 98%

• Sterile distilled or
boiled cold water

• Sterile distilled or
boiled cold water

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

• 10-litre glass or plastic bottles with screw-threaded stoppers ( 1 ), or
• 50-litre plastic tanks (preferably in polypropylene or high density
polyethylene, translucent so as to see the liquid level) ( 2 ), or
• Stainless steel tanks with a capacity of 80–100 litres
(for mixing without overflowing) ( 3 , 4 )
• Wooden, plastic or metal paddles for mixing ( 5 )
• Measuring cylinders and measuring jugs ( 6 , 7 )
• Plastic or metal funnel
• 100 ml plastic bottles with leak-proof tops ( 8 )
• 500 ml glass or plastic bottles with screw tops ( 8 )
• An alcoholometer: the temperature scale is at the bottom
and the ethanol concentration (percentage v/v) at the top
( 9 , 10 , 11 )

NOTE
• Glycerol: used as humectant, but other emollients may be used
for skin care, provided that they are cheap, widely available
and miscible in water and alcohol and do not add to toxicity,
or promote allergy.
• Hydrogen peroxide: used to inactivate contaminating bacterial
spores in the solution and is not an active substance for
hand antisepsis.
• Any further additive to both formulations should be clearly
labelled and be non-toxic in case of accidental ingestion.
• A colorant may be added to allow differentiation from other fluids,
but should not add to toxicity, promote allergy, or interfere with
antimicrobial properties. The addition of perfumes or dyes is
not recommended due to risk of allergic reactions.

11

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

METHOD: 10-LITRE PREPARATIONS
These can be prepared in 10-litre glass or plastic bottles with
screw-threaded stoppers.

Recommended amounts of products:
FORMULATION 1

FORMULATION 2

• Ethanol 96%: 8333 ml

• Isopropyl alcohol 99.8%:
7515 ml

• Hydrogen peroxide 3%: 417 ml

• Hydrogen peroxide 3%: 417 ml

• Glycerol 98%: 145 ml

• Glycerol 98%: 145 ml

Step by step preparation:
			
4.
				
				
				

The bottle/tank is then
topped up to the 10-litre
mark with sterile distilled
or cold boiled water.

			
5.
				
				
				
				

The lid or the screw cap
is placed on the tank/bottle
as soon as possible after
preparation, in order to
prevent evaporation.

			
2. Hydrogen peroxide
				 is added using the
				 measuring cylinder.

			
6.
				
				
				

The solution is mixed
by shaking gently where
appropriate or by using
a paddle.

			
3.
				
				
				
				
				
				
				

			
7.
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				

Immediately divide up the
solution into its final containers
(e.g. 500 or 100 ml plastic
bottles), and place the bottles
in quarantine for 72 hours
before use. This allows time
for any spores present in the
alcohol or the new/re-used
bottles to be destroyed.

			
1.
				
				
				

The alcohol for the formula
to be used is poured into
the large bottle or tank up
to the graduated mark.

			

Glycerol is added using a
measuring cylinder. As glycerol
is very viscous and sticks to
the wall of the measuring
cylinder, it should be rinsed
with some sterile distilled or
cold boiled water and then
emptied into the bottle/tank.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Final products

General information

FORMULATION 1

FORMULATION 2

Final concentrations:

Final concentrations:

• Ethanol 80% (v/v),

• Isopropyl alcohol 75% (v/v),

• Glycerol 1.45% (v/v),

• Glycerol 1.45% (v/v),

• Hydrogen peroxide
0.125% (v/v)

• Hydrogen peroxide
0.125% (v/v)

Labelling should be in accordance with national guidelines
and should include the following:
• Name of institution
• WHO-recommended handrub formulation
• For external use only
• Avoid contact with eyes
• Keep out of the reach of children
• Date of production and batch number

Quality control
1. Pre-production analysis should be made every time an analysis
certificate is not available to guarantee the titration of alcohol
(i.e. local production). Verify the alcohol concentration with
the alcoholmeter and make the necessary adjustments in
volume in the preparation formulation to obtain the final
recommended concentration.
			
2.
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				
				

Post-production analysis
is mandatory if either ethanol
or an isopropanol solution is
used. Use the alcoholmeter
to control the alcohol
concentration of the final
use solution. The accepted
limits should be fixed
to ± 5% of the target
concentration (75%–85%
for ethanol).

			
3.
				
				
				
				
				
				

The alcoholmeter shown in
this information pamphlet is
for use with ethanol; if used
to control an isopropanol
solution, a 75% solution will
show 77% (± 1%) on the
scale at 25°C.

• Use: Apply a palmful of alcohol-based handrub and cover all surfaces
of the hands. Rub hands until dry
• Composition: ethanol or isopropanol, glycerol and hydrogen peroxide
• Flammable: keep away from flame and heat

Production and storage facilities:
• Production and storage facilities should ideally be air conditioned
or cool rooms. No naked flames or smoking should be permitted
in these areas.
• WHO-recommended handrub formulations should not be produced
in quantities exceeding 50-litres locally or in central pharmacies
lacking specialised air conditioning and ventilation.
• Since undiluted ethanol is highly flammable and may ignite at
temperatures as low as 10°C, production facilities should directly
dilute it to the above-mentioned concentration. The flashpoints
of ethanol 80% (v/v) and of isopropyl alcohol 75% (v/v) are 17.5°C
and 19°C, respectively.
• National safety guidelines and local legal requirements must
be adhered to the storage of ingredients and the final product.
• Additional safety information is presented in Part B of this Guide.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

PART B: SUPPLEMENTARY TECHNICAL,
SAFETY AND COST INFORMATION:
Part B contains important safety and cost information and
incorporates information from the WHO Guidelines on
Hand Hygiene in Health Care (2009).

Efficacy
It is the consensus opinion of a WHO expert group that WHOrecommended handrub formulations can be used both for hygienic
hand antisepsis and for presurgical hand preparation.

Hygienic handrub
The case for alcohol-based handrubs
in health care
At present, alcohol-based handrubs are the only known means
for rapidly and effectively inactivating a wide array of potentially
harmful microorganisms on hands.
WHO recommends alcohol-based handrubs based on
the following factors:
1. Evidence-based, intrinsic advantages of fast-acting and
broad-spectrum microbicidal activity with a minimal risk
of generating resistance to antimicrobial agents;
2. Suitability for use in resource-limited or remote areas with
lack of accessibility to sinks or other facilities for hand hygiene
(including clean water, towels, etc.);
3. Capacity to promote improved compliance with hand hygiene
by making the process faster, more convenient and immediately
accessible at the point of patient care;
4. Economic benefit by reducing annual costs for hand hygiene,
representing approximately 1% of extra-costs generated by
health care-associated infection
5. Minimization of risks from adverse events because of increased
safety associated with better acceptability and tolerance than
other products.
(Source: WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care 2009)

Background to WHO alcohol-based
handrub formulations
According to the available evidence on efficacy, tolerability and costeffectiveness, WHO recommends using an alcohol-based handrub for
routine hand antisepsis in most clinical situations. Health-care facilities
currently using commercially-available handrubs, liquid soaps and
skin care products sold in disposable containers should continue this
practice, provided that the handrubs meet recognised standards for
microbicidal efficacy (ASTM or EN standards) and are well accepted/
tolerated by the health-care workers. It is obvious that these products
should be regarded as acceptable, even if their contents differ from
those of WHO-recommended formulations described within this
document. WHO recommends the local production of the following
formulations as an alternative when suitable commercial products are
either unavailable or too costly.

The microbicidal activity of the two WHO-recommended formulations
was tested by WHO reference laboratories according to EN standards
(EN 1500). Their activity was found to be equivalent to the reference
substance (isopropanol 60% v/v) for hygienic hand antisepsis.

Presurgical hand preparation
Both WHO-recommended handrub formulations were tested by two
independent reference laboratories in different European countries
to assess their suitability for use for pre-surgical hand preparation,
according to the European Standard EN 12791. Although formulation
I did not pass the test in both laboratories and formulation II in only
one of them, the expert group is, nevertheless, of the opinion that the
microbicidal activity of surgical antisepsis is still an ongoing issue for
research as due to the lack of epidemiological data there is no indication
that the efficacy of n-propanol (propan-1-ol) 60% v/v as a reference
in EN 12791 finds a clinical correlate. It is the consensus opinion of a
WHO expert group that the choice of n-propanol is inappropriate as
the reference alcohol for the validation process because of its safety
profile and the lack of evidence-based studies related to its potential
harmfulness for humans. Indeed, only a few formulations worldwide
have incorporated n-propanol for hand antisepsis.
Considering that other properties of WHO recommended formulations,
such as their excellent tolerability, good acceptance by health-care
workers and low cost are of high importance for a sustained clinical
effect, the above results are considered acceptable and it is the
consensus opinion of a WHO expert group that the two formulations can
be used for surgical hand preparation. Institutions opting to use WHOrecommended formulations for surgical hand preparation should ensure
that a minimum of three applications are used, if not more, for a period
of 3–5 minutes. For surgical procedures of more than 2 hours duration,
ideally surgeons should practise a second handrub of approximately 1
minute, even though more research is needed on this aspect.

Key lessons learned from around the world
Many settings around the world successfully undertook local production
of the two WHO-recommended formulations. Throughout Part B,
additional information is presented where relevant, in table form, based
on feedback from 11 sites located in Bangladesh, Costa Rica, Egypt,
Hong Kong SAR, Kenya, Mali, Mongolia, Pakistan (two sites), Saudi
Arabia, and Spain. Further, detailed information is available within
the WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care (2009)

To help countries and health-care facilities to achieve system change
and adopt alcohol-based handrubs, WHO has identified formulations
for their local preparation. Logistic, economic, safety, cultural and
religious factors have all been carefully considered by WHO before
recommending such formulations for use worldwide.

PAGE 5 OF 9

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Composition of alcohol-based formulations for
in-house/local production
The choice of components for WHO handrubs takes into account
both cost constraints and microbiological efficacy. The procurement
of raw ingredients will be influenced by the availability of sub-standard
materials on the market and it is important to select local sources
with care.

Raw materials:
While alcohol is the active component in the formulations, certain
aspects of other components should be respected. All raw materials
used should be preferably free of viable bacterial spores. The raw
materials for inclusion/consideration are listed in the table below:
H2O2

The following two alcohol-based handrub formulations are
recommended for preparation in-house or in a local production
facility, up to a maximum of 50 litres:

• H2O2 adds an important safety aspect, however
the use of 3–6% for the production might be
complicated by its corrosive nature and by
difficult procurement in some countries.

Formulation 1
To produce final concentrations of ethanol 80% v/v, glycerol
1.45% v/v, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) 0.125% v/v.

• Further investigation is needed to assess H2O2
availability in different countries as well as the
possibility of using a stock solution with a lower
concentration.

Formulation 2
To produce final concentrations of isopropyl alcohol 75% v/v,
glycerol 1.45% v/v, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) 0.125% v/v:
Only pharmacopoeial quality reagents should be used (e.g. The
International Pharmacopoeia) and not technical grade products.

• The low concentration of H2O2 is intended to
help eliminate contaminating spores in the
bulk solutions and recipients and is not an active
substance for hand antisepsis.

Glycerol
and other
humectants
or emollients

• Glycerol is added as a humectant to increase
the acceptability of the product.
• Other humectants or emollients may be used
for skin care, provided that they are affordable,
available locally, miscible (mixable) in water and
alcohol, non-toxic, and hypoallergenic.
• Glycerol has been chosen because it is safe and
relatively inexpensive. Lowering the percentage
of glycerol may be considered to further reduce
stickiness of the handrub.

Use of
proper
water

• While sterile distilled water is preferred for
making the formulations, boiled and cooled
tap water may also be used as long as it is free
of visible particules.

Addition
of other
additives

• It is strongly recommended that no ingredients
other than those specified here be added to
the formulations.
• In the case of any additions, full justification must
be provided together with documented safety
of the additive, its compatibility with the other
ingredients, and all relevant details should be
given on the product label.

Gelling
agents

• No data are available to assess the suitability
of adding gelling agents to WHO-recommended
liquid formulations, but this could increase
potentially both production difficulties and costs,
and may compromise antimicrobial efficacy.

Fragrances

• The addition of fragrances is not recommended
because of the risk of allergic reactions.

All handrub containers must be labelled in accordance with national
and international guidelines.

PAGE 6 OF 9

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Procurement of components: key learning from around the world
(based on feedback from the field)
Ethanol

Cleansing and disinfection process for reusable
handrub bottles:

Easier to procure from local suppliers due to
cost in some countries.

1. Bring empty bottles to a central point for reprocessing
by standard operational protocols;

• Can be derived from sugar cane or wheat.

2. Wash bottles thoroughly with detergent and tap water
to eliminate any residual liquid;

• Subject to licensing restrictions and strict
record-keeping – an important consideration
prior to embarking on production.
Isopropyl

Easier to procure in some countries.

Glycerol

Produced by local suppliers in most cases.

Hydrogen peroxide

Difficulties sourcing satisfactory H2O2 resulted
in the need to import in five sites.

Production and storage
Manufacture of WHO-recommended handrub formulations is feasible in
central pharmacies or dispensaries. Whenever possible and according to
local policies, governments should encourage local production, support
the quality assessment process, and keep production costs as low as
possible. Special requirements apply for the production and stock piling
of the formulations, as well as for the storage of the raw materials.
Because undiluted ethanol is highly flammable and may ignite at
temperatures as low as 10°C, production facilities should directly dilute it
to the concentrations detailed within this guide. (Refer to Summary table
of risks and mitigation measures concerning the use of alcohol-based
hand hygiene preparations)
WHO is exploring the development of additional guidance on large-scale
production to facilitate scale-up.
Production facilities and personnel: key learning from around the
world (based on feedback from the field)
Who are the
main producers?

• Qualified pharmacists.

How much is produced?

• 10 litres to 600,000 litres per
month was produced in test-sites.

Where does
production occur?

• Hospital pharmacy.

Production equipment

• Plastic, stainless steel and glass
containers were used for mixing.

Dispensers for
final product

• Ranges used:

3. If heat-resistant, thermally disinfect bottles by boiling in water.
Whenever possible, thermal disinfection should be chosen in
preference to chemical disinfection. The latter may increase
costs and introduces an extra step to flush out the remains of
the disinfectant. Chemical disinfection should include soaking the
bottles in a solution containing 1000 ppm of chlorine for a minimum
of 15 minutes and then rinsing with sterile/cooled boiled water;
4. After thermal or chemical disinfection, leave bottles to dry
completely upside-down in a bottle rack. Dry bottles should
be closed with a lid and stored, protected from dust, until use.

Quality Control:
If concentrated alcohol is obtained from local production, verify the
alcohol concentration and make the necessary adjustments in volume
to obtain the final recommended concentration. An alcoholmeter can
be used to control the alcohol concentration of the final use solution;
H2O2 concentration can be measured by titrimetry (oxydo-reduction
reaction by iodine in acidic conditions). A higher level quality control
can be performed using gas chromatography and the titrimetric
method to control the alcohol and the hydrogen peroxide content,
respectively. Moreover, the absence of microbial contamination
(including spores) can be checked by filtration, according to the
European Pharmacopeia specifications.
Quality control: key learning from around the world
(based on feedback from the field)
Method

• Seven sites sent samples to the
University of Geneva Hospitals,
Geneva, Switzerland, for quality
checks by gas chromatography
and the titrimetric method to
control the alcohol and the
hydrogen peroxide content.

• National drug companies.

– 100 ml pocket bottles
– 385 ml bottles

Addition of fragrance

• Quality was optimal for three
formulations in which either a
fragrance or special humectants
were added to WHO formulation I.

Extremes of climate

• Samples from Mali, which were
kept in a tropical climate without
air conditioning or special ventilation,
were in accordance with the optimal
quality parameters in all samples
up to 19 months after production.

– 500 ml wall-mounted dispensers
– 1 litre wall mounted bottles
		 or bags
Sources of dispensers

• Local sourcing can prove
problematic, some countries
had success working with
local private sector suppliers.

• Local alcoholmeters used in
majority of sites.

Storage volumes:
Special requirements are applicable for the production and storage
of the formulations, as well as the storage of the primary products.
The quantity of locally-produced WHO handrub should not exceed
50 litres, or possibly less if regulated by local and/or national
guidelines and regulations.

PAGE 7 OF 9

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Distribution

Safety Standards

To avoid contamination with spore-forming organisms, disposable
bottles should preferably be used although reusable sterilizable bottles
may reduce production costs and waste management. To prevent
evaporation, containers should have a maximum capacity of 500 ml on
ward and 1 litre in operating theatres, and ideally fit into a wall dispenser.
Leakage-free pocket bottles with a capacity of no more than 100 ml
should also be available and distributed individually to health-care
workers, but it should be emphasized that the use of these products
should be confined to health care only. The production or re-filling unit
should follow norms on how to clean and disinfect the bottles (e.g.
autoclaving, boiling, or chemical disinfection with chlorine). Autoclaving
is considered the most suitable procedure. Reusable bottles should
never be refilled until they have been completely emptied and then
cleansed and disinfected.

With regard to skin reactions, handrubbing with alcohol based solutions
is better tolerated than handwashing with soap and water. In a recent
study conducted among ICU health-care workers, the short-term
skin tolerability and acceptability of WHO-recommended handrub
formulations were significantly higher than those of a reference product.
Any additive should be as non-toxic as possible in case of accidental or
intentional ingestion.

Cleaning and recycling: key learning from around the world
(based on feedback from the field)
Cleaning and recycling
of dispensers

• The cleaning and recycling process
outlined in this document was applied
in six sites. Methods used for
disinfection varied and included
treatment with chlorine or alcohol.

Cost issues:
The costs of WHO handrub formulations may vary according to country,
resources and labour costs; studies to evaluate costs and resource
use are necessary. As a comparison, examples of actual prices of
commercially available alcohol-based handrubs in different countries
are detailed within the Guidelines.
Costs: Key learning from around the world (based on feedback
from the field)
Production cost (including
salaries but not the dispenser)
per 100 ml

Formulation 1:
• US$ 0.37 (Kenya)
• US$ 0.30 (Mali)
Formulation 2:
• US$ 0.30 (Bangladesh).

Production cost (including
the pocket bottle) per 100 ml

Formulation 1:
• US$ 0.50 (Hong Kong)
Formulation 2:
• US$ 0.44 (Pakistan)

Range of cost of commercially
available products per 100 ml

PAGE 8 OF 9

• US$ 2.50–5.40 (liquid)
• US$ 8 (gel)

General Safety Issues:
The main safety issues relate to the flammability of alcohol-based
handrubs and the adverse effects associated with accidental or
deliberate ingestion. These are summarised in the Summary table of
risks and mitigation measures concerning the use of alcohol-based
hand hygiene preparations.

Flammability – Flash-points:
The flash points of ethanol 80% (v/v) and isopropyl alcohol 75% (v/v)
are 17.5°C and 19°C, respectively, and special attention should be
given to proper storage in tropical climates. Production and storage
facilities should be ideally air-conditioned or cool rooms. Open flames
and smoking must be strictly prohibited in production and storage
areas. Pharmacies and small-scale production centres supplying WHOrecommended handrub formulations are advised not to manufacture
locally batches of more than 50 litres at a time.

Accidental ingestion:
In general, it is not recommended to add any bittering agents to reduce
the risk of ingestion of the handrubs. Nevertheless, in exceptional cases
where the risk of ingestion might be very high (paediatric or confused
patients), substances such as methylethylketone and denatonium
benzoate, added to some household products to make them less
palatable, may be added to alcohol-based handrubs in order to reduce
the risk of accidental or deliberate ingestion. However, there is no
published information on the compatibility and deterrent potential of
such chemicals when used in alcohol-based handrubs to discourage
their abuse. It is important to note that such additives may make the
products toxic and add to production costs. In addition, the bitter taste
may be transferred from hands to food being handled by individuals
using handrubs containing such agents. Therefore, compatibility and
suitability, as well as cost, must be carefully considered before deciding
on the use of such bittering agents.
A colorant may be incorporated to differentiate the handrub from
other fluids as long as such an additive is safe and compatible with
the essential components of the handrubs. However, the H2O2 in
the handrubs may tend to fade any colouring agent used and prior
testing is recommended.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

GUIDE TO LOCAL PRODUCTION: WHO-RECOMMENDED HANDRUB FORMULATIONS

Summary table of risks and mitigation measures
concerning the use of alcohol-based hand
hygiene preparations
Risk

Mitigation

Risk

Mitigation

Fire – general

• Do not produce in quantities exceeding 50
litres locally. If producing in excess of 50 litres,
produce only in central pharmacies with
specialized air conditioning and ventilation.

Fire – storage
(local)

• The quantity of handrub kept in a ward or
department should be as small as is reasonably
practicable for day-to-day purposes.

Fire – disposal

• Rinse out used containers with copious
amounts of cold water to reduce the risk of
fire (the containers may then be recycled or
disposed of in general waste).

Fire – location
of dispensers

• Handrub dispensers should not be placed
above or close to potential sources of ignition,
such as light switches and electrical outlets,
or next to oxygen or other medical gas
outlets (because of the increased risk of
vapours igniting).

Fire – spillage

• Significant spillages should be dealt with
immediately by removing all sources of ignition,
ventilating the area, and diluting the spillage
with water (to at least 10-times the volume).

• Since undiluted ethanol is highly flammable
production facilities should directly dilute it to
the concentrations outlined in this Guide.
• Involve fire officers, fire safety advisers, risk
managers, and health and safety and infection
control professionals in risk assessments prior
to embarking on system change
• Risk assessment should take into account:
– The location of dispensers
– The storage of stock
– The disposal of used containers/
		 dispensers and expired stock.
• Store away from high temperatures or flames

• The fluid should then be absorbed by an inert
material such as dry sand (not a combustible
material such as sawdust), which should be
disposed of in a chemical waste container.

• Water or aqueous (water) film-forming foam
(AFFF) should be used in case of fire; other
types of extinguishers may be ineffective and
may spread the fire over a larger area rather
than put it out.

• Vapours should be dispersed by ventilating
the room (or vehicle), and the contaminated
item should be put in a plastic bag until it can
be washed and/or dried safely.

• Health-care workers should be advised to
rub hands until dry (once dry – hands are safe).
Fire –
production
and storage
(central)

• Local and central (bulk) storage must comply
with fire regulations regarding the type of
cabinet and store, respectively.

• In areas where there is thought to be a high risk
of ingestion, a staff-carried product is advised.
• If a wall-mounted product is used, consideration
should be given to small bottles.

• Production and storage facilities should
ideally be air-conditioned or cool rooms.
• No naked flames or smoking should be
permitted in these areas.

• If bottles with a greater capacity than 500 ml
are used, consideration should be given to
providing them in secured containers.

• National safety guidelines and local legal
requirements must be adhered to for the
storage of ingredients and the final product.

• Product containers may be labelled simply
as “antimicrobial handrubs” with a warning of
dangers associated with ingestion.

• Containers/dispensers should be stored in a
cool place and care should be taken regarding
the securing of tops/lids.

• National and local toxicology specialists should
be involved in developing and issuing national/
local guidance on how to deal with ingestion
(based on products available within a country).

• A designated ‘highly flammables’ store will be
required for situations where it is necessary to
store more than 50 litres.
• Containers and dispenser cartridges containing
handrub should be stored in a cool place away
from sources of ignition. This applies also to
used containers that have not been rinsed
with water.

Ingestion

Other

• Consideration should be given to the risks
associated with spillage onto floor coverings,
including the risk of pedestrian slips – it is
important to deal with spillages immediately.
• The siting of handrub dispensers above
carpets is not recommended, because of the
risk of damage and lifting/warping of carpets.

All reasonable precautions have been taken by the World Health Organization to verify the information contained in this document. However, the published
material is being distributed without warranty of any kind, either expressed or implied. The responsibility for the interpretation and use of the material lies with
the reader. In no event shall the World Health Organization be liable for damages arising from its use.

